[Merged by Bors] - Probability interface tutorial (#404)
TuringLang/DynamicPPL.jl: docs/src/tutorials/prob-interface.md

# The Probability Interface

The easiest way to manipulate and query DynamicPPL models is via the DynamicPPL probability
interface.

Let's use a simple model of normally-distributed data as an example.

> ```julia

Reviewer: These code blocks won't be executed as part of the documentation and hence it is not clear if they work at all. They should be `@example`s (see https://documenter.juliadocs.org/stable/man/syntax/#@example-block):
````suggestion
```@example probinterface
````

using DynamicPPL, Distributions, Random

> rng = Xoshiro(1776);  # Set seed for reproducibility

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rng = Xoshiro(1776)  # Set seed for reproducibility
```

n = 100

> DynamicPPL.@model function gdemo(n)

Reviewer: It's exported by DynamicPPL, no need to qualify it:
```suggestion
@model function gdemo(n)
```

   μ ~ Normal(0, 1)
   σ ~ Exponential(1)

>    x = Vector{Float64}(undef, n)
>    x .~ Normal(μ, σ)

Reviewer: AD support is much better if you write just
```suggestion
   x ~ MvNormal(Fill(μ, n), σ^2 * I)
```
(requires importing FillArrays and LinearAlgebra which are already indirect dependencies) or
```suggestion
   x ~ product_distribution(Fill(Normal(μ, σ), n))
```
(requires FillArrays which is already an indirect dependency) or
```suggestion
   x ~ filldist(Normal(μ, σ), n)
```
(requires DistributionsAD).
In most (all?) tutorials we moved from the in-place syntax to these formulations, both due to AD and since it makes it much easier to condition on `x` if desired.
Hence I think it would be better to use `x ~ ...` here as well.

   return nothing
end

dataset = randn(rng, n)
```

## Conditioning and Deconditioning

> Bayesian models can be transformed with two main operations, conditioning and deconditioning (also known as marginalization). Conditioning takes a variable and fixes its value as known. We do this by passing a model and a named tuple of conditioned variables to `|`:

Reviewer: Diffs of future changes are simpler and easier to read if every sentence is put on a separate line:
 ```suggestion
Bayesian models can be transformed with two main operations, conditioning and deconditioning (also known as marginalization).
Conditioning takes a variable and fixes its value as known.
We do this by passing a model and a named tuple of conditioned variables to `|`:
```

> ```julia

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```@example probinterface
````

model = gdemo(n) | (x=dataset, μ=0, σ=1)
```

This operation can be reversed by applying `decondition`:

> ```julia

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```@example probinterface
````

decondition(model)
```

We can also decondition only some of the variables:

> ```julia

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```@example probinterface
````

decondition(model, :μ, :σ)
```

## Probabilities and Densities

> We often want to calculate the (unnormalized) probability density for an event. This
> probability might be a prior, a likelihood, or a posterior (joint) density. DynamicPPL
> provides convenient functions for this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We often want to calculate the (unnormalized) probability density for an event.
This probability might be a prior, a likelihood, or a posterior (joint) density.
DynamicPPL provides convenient functions for this.
```

For example, if we wanted to calculate the probability of a draw from the prior:

> ```julia

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```@example probinterface
````

model = gdemo(n) | (x=dataset,)
x1 = rand(rng, model)
logjoint(model, x1)
```

For convenience, we provide the functions `loglikelihood` and `logjoint` to calculate probabilities for a named tuple, given a model:
```julia

> logjoint(model, x1) ≈ loglikelihood(model, x1) + logprior(model, x1)

Reviewer: It is a bit unclear that users should not run this line but that it is used to explain `logjoint`.

Reviewer 2: I changed it into an assertation -- hopefully, it is self-explanatory.

```

## Example: Cross-validation

> To give an example of the probability interface in use, we can write a function to test the performance of our model using cross-validation. In cross-validation, we split the dataset into several equal parts. Then, we choose one of these sets to serve as the test set. Here, we measure fit using the cross entropy (Bayes loss). (See [ParetoSmooth.jl](https://github.com/TuringLang/ParetoSmooth.jl) for a faster and more accurate implementation of cross-validation.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To give an example of the probability interface in use, we can write a function to test the performance of our model using cross-validation.
In cross-validation, we split the dataset into several equal parts.
Then, we choose one of these sets to serve as the test set.
Here, we measure fit using the cross entropy (Bayes loss).
See [ParetoSmooth.jl](https://github.com/TuringLang/ParetoSmooth.jl) for a faster and more accurate implementation of cross-validation.
```

```julia

> using MLUtils, Turing

Reviewer: As written above, depending on Turing should be avoided at all costs.
```suggestion
using MLUtils
```

decondition(model, :μ, :σ)
```

## Probabilities and Densities

We often want to calculate the (unnormalized) probability density for an event.
This probability might be a prior, a likelihood, or a posterior (joint) density.
DynamicPPL provides convenient functions for this.
For example, if we wanted to calculate the probability of a draw from the prior:
```@example probinterface
model = gdemo(n) | (x=dataset,)
x1 = rand(rng, model)
logjoint(model, x1)
```

For convenience, we provide the functions `loglikelihood` and `logjoint` to calculate probabilities for a named tuple, given a model:
```@example probinterface
@assert logjoint(model, x1) ≈ loglikelihood(model, x1) + logprior(model, x1)
```

## Example: Cross-validation

To give an example of the probability interface in use, we can use it to estimate the performance of our model using cross-validation.
In cross-validation, we split the dataset into several equal parts.
Then, we choose one of these sets to serve as the validation set.
Here, we measure fit using the cross entropy (Bayes loss).
See [ParetoSmooth.jl](https://github.com/TuringLang/ParetoSmooth.jl) for a faster and more accurate implementation of cross-validation.

> ```julia

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``` @example probinterface
```

end

dataset = randn(rng, n)
```

## Conditioning and Deconditioning

Bayesian models can be transformed with two main operations, conditioning and deconditioning (also known as marginalization).
Conditioning takes a variable and fixes its value as known.
We do this by passing a model and a named tuple of conditioned variables to `|`:
```@example probinterface
model = gdemo(n) | (x=dataset, μ=0, σ=1)
```

This operation can be reversed by applying `decondition`:
```@example probinterface
decondition(model)
```

We can also decondition only some of the variables:
```@example probinterface
decondition(model, :μ, :σ)
```

## Probabilities and Densities

We often want to calculate the (unnormalized) probability density for an event.
This probability might be a prior, a likelihood, or a posterior (joint) density.
DynamicPPL provides convenient functions for this.
For example, if we wanted to calculate the probability of a draw from the prior:
```@example probinterface
model = gdemo(n) | (x=dataset,)
x1 = rand(rng, model)
logjoint(model, x1)
```

For convenience, we provide the functions `loglikelihood` and `logjoint` to calculate probabilities for a named tuple, given a model:

> ```julia
> logjoint(model, x1) ≈ loglikelihood(model, x1) + logprior(model, x1)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```@example probinterface
@assert logjoint(model, x1) ≈ loglikelihood(model, x1) + logprior(model, x1)
```

```

## Example: Cross-validation

> To give an example of the probability interface in use, we can write a function to test the performance of our model using cross-validation.

Reviewer: Technically not a function but only a script is provided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To give an example of the probability interface in use, we can use it to estimate the performance of our model using cross-validation.
```

In cross-validation, we split the dataset into several equal parts.

> Then, we choose one of these sets to serve as the test set.

Reviewer: Maybe rather call it validation set?
```suggestion
Then, we choose one of these sets to serve as the validation set.
```

Here, we measure fit using the cross entropy (Bayes loss).
See [ParetoSmooth.jl](https://github.com/TuringLang/ParetoSmooth.jl) for a faster and more accurate implementation of cross-validation.
```julia

> using MLUtils

Reviewer: MLUtils is a huge dependency. I wonder if it is necessary at all to use cross-validation in the example or if one could just show how the validation can be computed on a single random training-validation split. So possibly it could be removed:
```suggestion
```

training_loss = zero(logjoint(model, x1))

> for (train, test) in kfolds(dataset, 5)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for (train, validation) in kfolds(dataset, 5)
```

   # First, we train the model on the training set using Turing.jl
   trained_posterior = sample(
      rng,
      gdemo(length(train)) | (x = train,),
      NUTS(),

>       1000;
>       chain_type=StructArray

Reviewer: Why not just use the regular `Chains` output? This would also require to import StructArrays which is not done currently.
```suggestion
      1000,
```

   )
   # Extract posterior samples

>    samples = map.(only∘first, getproperty.(trained_posterior, :θ))
>    training_loss += sum(samples) do sample
>       model = gdemo(length(test))
>       logjoint(model | (x = test,), sample)
>    end

Reviewer: This seems difficult to understand for users (in particular how to compute `samples`), and also unnecessarily complicated:
```suggestion
   model_validation = gdemo(length(test)) | (x = validation,)
   training_loss += sum(trained_posterior) do sample
      params = map(only∘first, sample.θ)
      logjoint(model_validation, params)
   end
```
